next year's US presidential election is
predicted to be a contest between Joe
Biden and Donald Trump but not even that
is certain in the most uncertain of
election campaigns so who else might be
in the mix and what are the important
issues this is Inside
Story
[Music]
hello and welcome to the program I'm Dar
abuga November the 5th 2024 is the day
Americans will vote for their next
president most predict a contest between
President Joe Biden and Donald Trump
who's seeking a return to the White
House but with Trump facing criminal
charges and Biden an impeachment inquiry
if a week is a long time in politics 11
months feels like an eternity who'll
actually be on the ballot paper isn't
certain yet in a campaign swirling with
volatility world leaders are preoccupied
with an uncertain global economic and
political Outlook a widening East West
divide and international involvement in
major Wars in Ukraine and Gaza but what
do American voters worry about who will
they pick in an election that has Global
implications we'll be discussing this
and more with our guests in a moment but
first Carl leg takes a look at how
things are playing out so far in the
battle for the White
House with less than a year to go the
race is on for America's top job and the
2024 US presidential election promises
to be like no other
[Music]
before leading the field of Republican
candidates is former president Donald
Trump who's facing federal and state
criminal charges relating to his 2020
election lost Mr President what's the
latest on a gun deal the incumbent Joe
Biden is the presumptive Democratic
nominee already the oldest president in
American history seeking another term
the gloves are already off with Trump
taking aim at Biden at a rally in
Colorado shortly after a court barred
him from appearing on the state's
ballot Joe Biden is a threat to
democracy it's a
threat Biden has hit back telling voters
his pred is all bark and no bite Trump
just talks to talk we walk the
walk the latest polls suggest it's neck
and neck if the election were a
head-to-head contest with Trump ahead of
Biden by 2% in a New York Times Sienna
College opinion poll another survey by
The Wall Street Journal suggests Trump
is ahead by
4%
let despite Trump dominating the
Republican field he currently faces six
Rivals the most prominent of Florida
Governor Ronda Santos former US
ambassador to the United Nations Nikki
Haley and former New Jersey Governor
Chris
Christie former Arkansas governor Isa
Hutchinson a Longshot candidate and
political newcomer businessman Vic
ramaswami with little opposition in the
Democratic party Biden and his vice
president Cala Harris have the biggest
backing but face challenges from Dean
Phillips a little known congressman from
Minnesota and self-help author and
speaker Maran
Williamson but other contenders have
thrown their hats into the ring Robert F
Kennedy Jr from the famed American
political family has launched an
independent bid Progressive activist
Cornell West says he'll do the same
while former presidential candidate Jill
Stein has said she will seek the green
party's nomination
the challenge will be to get enough
support to get their name on the ballot
paper in all 50 states next year it all
kicks off in January when Republican
voters in Iowa hold their nominating
contest known as the caucuses then it'll
be a long wait until November to see who
come out on
top regardless of who wins the issues
remain the same domestic concerns such
as rising inflation and the cost of
living crime gun control and illegal
drugs Health Care welfare and Social
Security as well as migration with
record numbers of people crossing the
southern border with Mexico this year
further a field the relationship with
China continues to dominate foreign
policy Israel's war on Gaza and Russia's
invasion of Ukraine both of which
receive us backing and funding but for
now it'll be the hopeful candidates who
need backing as they seek to win the
hearts and minds of us voters car Al
jazer for Inside
Story all right let's bring in our guest
joining us from uh St August Augustine
in Florida is Tim Constantine who's a
senior vice president of diplomacy and
external Affairs at the Washington Times
he's also the host of the Capitol Hill
show and from Harrisburg Pennsylvania we
have with us Thomas gift who's the
director of the center on us politics
University College London and from
Burlington Vermont we're joined by Arad
Hassan who's a Democratic political
strategist welcome to you all thanks for
your time Arad I'll begin with you
because uh look according to one poll by
uh polling firm 538 Biden's approval
rating is sitting at around 34% and that
is the worst of any president at the
same point since polling uh data be
became available how much does this
worry the
Democrats I I know that there are some
people who are a little bit worried
about this but when we contextualize it
in terms of whether you would vote for
Joe Biden when that poll question is
asked he's sitting about the same place
he was this time about four years ago
and remember four years ago um he ended
up becoming the uh the nominee and the
president so I think people are more
focused a year out people shouldn't
really be that focused on the polls
themselves more about what the
candidates each are doing right but is
he putting his party at risk by
running I don't think so right now he's
running one of the strongest economies
recoveries we've seen in this country
and as as it gets closer and closer to
the election as more and more people see
that they're more secure in their
livelihoods they're more secure in their
household budgets um they'll see that
this economy is much better than it was
this point four years ago and that's
what people will be looking for when
they start making those decisions at The
Ballot Box I think this will be good
okay just one more for you before I
bring in my other guests because you
know in the context of the Gaza war that
we've been seeing AR shads we hear from
a lot of Arab American voters who say
that President Biden won't be getting
their vote because of his stance um and
and his stance that he's taken uh to
support Israel no matter what is that
going to make a big
difference I actually do think and I'll
differ from some of my colleagues here I
do think that that is something that Joe
Biden needs to get a handle on
arab-american voters make up an enormous
amount a significant amount of the
electorate in one of one of the biggest
swing states in the country Michigan and
so Joe Biden needs to be doing Outreach
and communicating to this community um
if he wants to shore up an important
constituency within an important state
and that's politics he does need to do
the work here all right Thomas let's
bring you in because um I want to stick
with Biden uh for just a moment before
we talk about the other candidates as
well as Trump does Biden have the energy
to actually fuel a campaign at this time
because much is made uh about his age
he's 81 and he would be the oldest
American to win a presidential election
should he win uh that nomination of
course well I mean I think that that's
certainly a legitimate question and it's
one that Republicans are trying to put
front and center and especially given
kamla Harris's very poor polling numbers
ones that are even lower than Joe Biden
they're essentially trying to uh depict
a vote for Biden as being a vote for
Harris and I still think that voters by
and large um you know vote for the top
of the ticket um but it has to be a
consideration given his age and I do
think that this is a drag on Joe Biden's
poll numbers it's very difficult to look
at the numbers right now even with the
caveat that we are about a year out and
be uh in any way encouraged by them not
only uh nationally does it look like Joe
Biden is maybe losing by a few
percentage points uh to Donald Trump at
the moment but he's losing in almost all
the key swing states there was a recent
poll that came out showing that Donald
Trump had an edge in uh seven key
Battleground States um so for lots of
reasons both uh related to Joe Biden's
uh performance potentially his age he's
just not polling well I mean the the one
so how do you think that the White House
is dealing with this Thomas I mean does
the White House have a convincing
message to Democrats about why they
shouldn't be
nervous well I think that to a large
extent the White House has tried to
frame this as a public relations problem
and that they're just not getting the
message out but I think that a lot of
Voters are just dissatisfied with the
state of the US economy and the state
that the country is going at the moment
now I do think that it's it's
interesting that uh polls so show such
disfavor ability um on the economy
because if you looked at some objective
measures uh inflation has decreased
considerably uh jobs numbers are still
relatively robust it looks like the
economy is going to achieve this soft
Landing that many feared that it would
not be able to so there does seem to be
a disconnect between what's happening um
on the ground and and how Americans are
reacting but you know ultimately I I
think Joe Biden um has to figure out
some uh way to to circumvent that
challenge because it's really been
dragging down his numbers okay let's
bring in Tim I mean do you agree with
that and um is it just going to be Joe
Biden Tim or How likely is a a
democratic shakeup at this
point I see an entirely different
scenario and and I've been saying this
for months and when I first said it
people kind of laughed and thought I was
crazy but as time has gone on they think
hm maybe maybe there's something to this
I believe Joe Biden will will continue
to run through the primary process in
the United States you mentioned in the
opening Iowa there's Iowa New Hampshire
South Carolina they go state by state
there are a few days where there are
multiple States and by May or so
hopefully someone in either party has
racked up enough delegates to officially
be the candidate for their party I think
Jo Biden will go through that process
and then enter the convention this
summer the Democrat Convention as the
assumed nominee however I think at that
convention Joe Biden and the people
around him will announce H I have had
I've seen the light I've I've had a a
thought here that perhaps I am too old
perhaps I am not ready to go for another
four years however his people will
control all of those delegates which
means essentially they can choose they
get to they have unusually large sway
over who their nominee will be I think
you you'll see Michelle Obama Joe
Biden's Administration is essentially
Biden 2.0 uh Biden is Obama 2.0 meaning
a whole lot of the people that work in
that Administration are Obama people
Obama presidency people they would ask
you I got to ask you what you're basing
this on I mean you you say that this is
just is this the the feeling you have
you think this is what's going to happen
or or or is there do you have some
Insider info you can share with us no I
think it's based on political reality
you know your earlier guest said the
economy is good I just disagree it's
good compared to where it was 18 months
ago but it's not good having three and a
half% inflation isn't great it's better
than the 9% inflation but when they say
there's a disconnect between the voter
between the resident of the United
States the citizen and the actual
economy I don't think there is when on
Election Day in 2020 I literally went
out and took a photograph of how much
gas was on that day it was a buck 89 for
a gallon of gas and over the last couple
of years it's gone as high as $4 doll
every single of American puts gasoline
in their car so when gas is twice as
expensive they feel it in their wallet
if you buy things like eggs they are
twice as expensive so there's no
disconnect that's real life when people
go out this it's winter time here now
and you can buy a bag of wood at the
grocery store to put in your fireplace a
year and a half ago or a winter of a
year ago it was $5 a bag it is now $9 a
bag so those are real numbers those are
real hits on people and the reality is
you've got an 81y old president who
looks and acts every one of those 81
years he falls down on stage he looks
lost on stage he does not look like he
is in charge at a time when there is war
raging in the Middle East there's war
raging in Ukraine and Russia and NOP all
issues that we're going to get on to all
issues we're going to get on to but just
allow me to let our point being I don't
think Biden point being I don't think
Biden is a viable candidate I think the
Democrats know that your Democrat guest
is gonna say stand by stand by for a
moment because I do want to get back to
arshad because I saw you shaking your
head when Tim was suggesting that
Michelle Obama might be put
forward I'm sorry but this is absurd
it's completely un serious that's not
how any of this works I've actually been
a delegate uh a number of times at the
convention it just doesn't work like
this Michelle Obama herself who's a
vastly highly popular figure among
Americans and particularly in the
Democratic party has absolutely no
interest in running for any office of
any sort moreover you need to put
together an entire campaign an entire
infrastructure for any of this kind of
stuff to work it doesn't happen in
secret people would know so I'm sorry
but this is uh be lovely I think
Michelle Obama is lovely but that's a
honey this point all right I mean at
this point at this point you know we'll
we'll have to wait to see what happen
just very briefly Tim very briefly
because I'd like to move on to another
issue go on sure here's why it will work
for Michelle Obama to run a campaign for
nine months would not work she has a
tendency to put her foot in her mouth
even when she has the best of intentions
however in this scenario the Democrat
convention is late in August which
leaves her only September and October
before election day the first 30 days
the American Media who loves Michelle
Obama will Fawn all over her she will
not have to do anything and then the
last 30 days first of all she'll decline
to debate Trump or whomever the nominee
is because Trump for example this year
refused to participate in the Republican
debates so there's no problem there's no
he has no uh legitimate argument when
she says thank you but no thank you I'm
not going to debate well I'm glad you're
bring up
last note last note instead she'll do a
television special with Oprah and that
will get huge ratings and American women
and American minorities both key
constituencies will absolutely love her
this is all right we'll we'll have to
wait to see what happens and we'll check
in with both of you gentlemen at the
time uh to see whether these predictions
have come true but Thomas let me bring
you in on the Republican side the
expectation is that Trump is going to be
victorious that's the expectation
according to the polls as well but what
we we see now is that his legal troubles
are back at the Forefront and we also
saw that recently the Colorado High
Court ruled that Trump is ineligible to
run again for president um first talk to
us about what happened in Colorado and
what does this disqualification mean for
Trump going forward if anything at
all well it was a 4-3 decision in
Colorado essentially banning Donald
Trump uh from being on the ballot Trump
is going to appeal this to the Supreme
Court and I think in all likelihood the
Supreme Court is going to overrule that
decision and that he will ultimately be
on the ballot but I think uh from
Trump's standpoint in terms of the
campaign this was an early Christmas
gift for him uh it was a present just
like all the other indictments that uh
have helped him and will continue to
help him and Donald Trump is basically
able to to frame this as yet another
example of where uh the judicial system
is being weaponized against him that
he's the the victim that this is a hope
folks um that this is a Witch Hunt uh
Etc and we've seen his poll numbers of
course uh increase every single time uh
he has faced legal difficulties I don't
think that this instance will be any
different and I really do think that
Donald Trump is going to be the runaway
um nominee for the the Republican side
he has a big lead in Iowa almost 30
percentage points we are seeing Nikki
haey to an extent um reduce that margin
in New Hampshire but I still think that
she's just too far away uh from Donald
Trump and especially given what we saw
um over this last week it's only going
to uh Shepherd him to the nomination
Arad do you agree with this that this
helps Trump uh when it comes to his run
for presidency and also um what impact
does uh all of this have on Independent
voters I that's where the question
really is first I'll say this I can
agree that Donald Trump is a consumate
grifter no matter what happens he's
gonna find a way to raise money off of
it that's exactly what he's been doing
that's exactly what he'll continue to do
regardless of the outcome of any of
these sort of verdicts but to your
second question what does this do for
independent voters I agree the Supreme
Court May well strike this down and
Trump will appear on the ballots but the
message this is reinforcing for
independent voters people are
potentially persuadable is this
reinforces the fact that Donald Trump
constantly gets himself into legal TR
trouble and I don't mean small little
legal trouble I mean defrauding denying
and conspiring conspiring to overthrow
the will of the people Americans these
these prosecutions people forget that in
order to get these prosecutions in order
to get these indictments grand juries of
everyday Americans people from all over
and all different kinds of backgrounds
in multiple jurisdictions have indicted
Donald Trump on now over 90 different
charges every time the Donald Trump goes
to court sure he'll send out an email to
raise money off of it but also it will
remind voters that this man is
unreliable unstable and does not respect
the will of the people okay Tim um react
to that and also tell us who's likely to
challenge Trump in the primaries at
least I mean there are a number of
candidates but who's the most likely
threat do you
think sure the and just to to the last
comment there the indictment doesn't
mean anything that's not a charge of
guilt that means there's there's a
charge in the indictment process before
a grand jury only one side is presented
the prosecutor presents his side there
is no defense whatsoever and the only
question of the grand jury is do you
have enough information that this should
go to trial but they only hear one side
of the story so an indictment means
absolutely nothing and in the United
States you are presumed innocent until
you were found guilty in trial and trial
so okay what about the other
candidates on the other candidates I
think what we'll keep an eye on is in
Iowa even though he polls way ahead I
don't know how much uh of a structure he
has Iowa is a caucus instead of a
primary meaning at a primary you go you
vote you go back to work or you go home
or at a caucus you stay there for hours
and it's all about being organized but
Iowa also has a long history of picking
losers Ted Cruz won Iowa in 2016 Rick
Santorum won in in 2012 you go all the
way back to Reagan and George Bush beat
Ronald Reagan in Iowa so Iowa it may
create some momentum for someone but it
is not the end all Beall what it will do
if Trump wins that big if he wins by 40
points it continues the the uh feeling
of
inevitability uh Tom mentioned there
there was a recent poll in New Hampshire
that showed Nikki Haley within Striking
Distance that that most recent poll and
I think it was a Tipp poll I might be
mistaken but a credible poll was had
Trump at 33 Nikki Haley at 29 so I think
the only place you're going to see a
possibility is if she does well in New
Hampshire South Carolina which is her
home state is the third state in the
process so then maybe you set up a
little race but I think it's going to be
awful tough for any of the other
candidates to overcome the numbers we're
seeing Tom what about the issues uh that
are important for Americans I mean
obviously the economies one we've
already spoken about that but what other
issues will will voters be taking into
consideration when it comes to domestic
uh us issues we'll get on to foreign
policy in just a
moment right well I think that the
economy is front and center uh that's
always going to be uh the case and if
the economy is trending up of course
that's going to help uh Joe Biden if it
stays sort of at the the current level I
think that this is good for the
Republican nominee if that's Trump or or
someone else immigration uh certainly is
an issue I think that uh Republicans can
make significant uh progress on in terms
of uh challenging uh the administration
also the abortion issue is one that um
is kind of the gift that keeps on giving
for Democrats we saw that particularly
in uh 2022 midterms we saw that in the
2023 uh offe elections as well that's
something that uh Republicans by and
large have had difficulty grappling with
but I ultimately think that if is it is
Trump versus Biden and 2024 this
election is going to be less about
specific policy issues and more about
just the personalities of these two
individuals I think it will largely just
be a referendum on uh Donald Trump
typically we see referendums on the
idual who's in the white house but
Donald Trump just because of his
outsized personality his
polarized um status it's all going to be
about you know do we want uh four more
years of this individual or do we want
kind of more of the same do we want the
status quo okay Arad what about foreign
policy issues I mean we know uh you know
judging by uh past elections in history
Americans don't vote on foreign policy
issues when it comes to uh picking their
presidents right but
now with the Gaza war going on with the
Ukraine War uh going on um with the you
know competition for for China taking
place with the
US uh what's the is there a conversation
on these issues happening right now
amongst American
voters I'll be honest I have to say that
the conversation happening amongst
American voters and the conversation
that most politicians are happening do
not line up particularly well including
when it comes to the when it comes to
the Middle East in Gaza in particular
you have both the Democratic party and
the Republican Party refusing to support
a ceasefire in Gaza although most
Americans almost two to one support a
ceasefire so there are certainly
conversations happening but this is one
where both parties have really
disconnected from the American people
it's kind of a way of saying you know
it's a it's really not a big alternative
between the between the two parties
there which is another way of saying
that it's not really going to affect the
election a great deal this is choice
here's the thing Tim China China is a
big one because China what happens with
China affects the American economy um so
we know that Republicans are arguing
that China is a growing threat to the
National Security of the US a threat to
Us corporate interests as well as to
taiwan's Independence and President
Biden is saying that his administration
wants to drisk and not decouple its
relationship with China and to work to
keep the competition between the world's
number one and number two economic
powers from escalating
into a conflict is that going to
resonate with voters Tim yeah you know
it's one of those things where again I
think it's a fuzz it's a blur it's uh
somehow white noise when you talk to
voters about that they know they go to
the store or they go online and they
purchase a product and there's a pretty
good chance it might be made in China
short of that the rest of it is white
noise to them so Biden may have a
message Trump may have a message but I
don't think either one of them will
spend a great deal of time talking about
China and I I I I just I don't think
that's something that's going to
resonate with voters at all I do think
the one bit of foreign policy that will
resonate is particularly with Arab
Americans and with Jewish Americans is
the Gaza Strip and I I think Biden is
being treated I'll say unfairly here
because the Jewish community in the
United States doesn't think he's being
strong enough and the Arab Community
feels totally abandoned so he could lose
both sides because of the way that
situation has been handled thus far by
his
administration right okay and just one
final thought from all three gentlemen
Thomas I'll start with you um are
Americans excited by Trump versus Biden
election I think it's the exact opposite
of excitement uh and in fact I think
it's dejection and just really just
total uh just fatigue I I don't think
that they want to see a rematch of 2020
and that's the big irony here which is
that you have two of the primary uh
candidates both of whom have poll
numbers that are underwater um most
people don't want Joe Biden most people
want Donald Trump they want an
alternative um but because of how our
primary system works and how deference
to the incumbent uh works in the White
House this is the uh option that they're
going to get but yeah I think it's
you're hard pressed to find someone who
thinks that this is the exact Arad do
you think that voter apathy will play A
Part
if Americans are not excited about this
election if it's if it is a Trump versus
Biden one in 30 seconds
please I know and I will say this I know
for a fact that the Democratic party
must work on voter apathy it can be a
problem for us the one thing that I do
know is that many voters are motivated
to vote against Trump uh very clearly
same as last time it is also important
that the Democratic Party Works uh on
its base to make sure that there is
enthusiasm for Biden both these things
need to be true all right Tim final word
to
you uh rasmon put out a poll that showed
61% of Americans 61% said they don't
want to see that rematch so if you talk
about apathy or frustration you have hit
it on the nose I think this is an odd
case where a third party candidate can't
win the way the system is set up but
could have an impact on the outcome if a
third party get in there may be enough
people that are so frustrated on both
sides of the issue that they they go
down that Center and that has an impact
on who ultimately wins all right we'll
have to see what happens for the time
being thank you so much gentlemen for
joining us Tim Constantine Thomas gift
and Arad Hassan thanks for your
time thanks for watching you can see the
program again anytime by visiting our
website aljazeera.com for further
discussion go to our Facebook page
that's facebook.com/ AJ insidestory join
the conversation on X our handle is AJ
inside story from myself and the whole
team here in do house thanks for
watching and bye-bye for
[Music]
now